.\" =========================================================================
.\" Copyright (c) 1990-2015 Info-ZIP.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" See the accompanying file LICENSE, version 2009-Jan-2 or later
.\" (the contents of which are also included in zip.h) for terms of use.
.\" If, for some reason, all these files are missing, the Info-ZIP license
.\" also may be found at:  ftp://ftp.info-zip.org/pub/infozip/license.html
.\" ==========================================================================
.\"
.\" zipcloak.1 by E. Gordon for Zip 3.0, 3.1
.\"
.TH ZIPCLOAK 1 "6 November 2015 (v3.1)" Info-ZIP
.SH NAME
zipcloak \- encrypt entries in a zipfile (v3.1)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.I zipcloak
.RB [ \-d ]
.RB [ \-b\ path ]
.RB [ \-O file ]
.RB [ \-Y em ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-L ]
zipfile

.SH ARGUMENTS
.in +13
.ti -13
zipfile  Zipfile to encrypt entries in

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.PD 0
.B \-b\ \fPpath
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-temp\-path \fPpath
Use the directory given by path for the temporary zip file.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-d
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-decrypt
Decrypt encrypted entries (copy if given wrong password).

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-h
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-help\ 
Show a short help.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-L
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-license
Show software license.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-O\ \fPpath
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-output\-file\ \fPzipfile
Write output to new archive zipfile, leaving original archive as is.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-q
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-quiet
Quiet operation.  Suppresses some informational messages.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-v
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-version
Show version information.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-Y\ \fPem
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-encryption\-method\ \fPem
Set the encryption method.  Supported methods are \fBTraditional\fP
(weak), and WinZip-compatible AES (strong) with various key lengths:
\fBAES128\fP, \fBAES192\fP, and \fBAES256\fP.  AES encryption must be
enabled at build time, and requires a compatible Info-ZIP AES encryption
kit.  (See INSTALL in the \fBzip\fR source kit for more information.)
An AES-capable UnZip program is needed to extract AES-encrypted entries.

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I zipcloak
encrypts all unencrypted entries in the zipfile.  This is the default action.

.TP
The \-d option is used to decrypt encrypted entries in the zipfile.

.TP
\fBzipcloak\fR defaults to using original zip encryption, which is
considered weak.  Use of AES encryption is recommended.

.TP
Traditional (ZipCrypto) encryption notice:

The encryption code of this program is not copyrighted and is put in
the public domain.  It was originally written in Europe and can be freely
distributed from any country including the U.S.A.  (Previously if this
program was imported into the U.S.A, it could not be re-exported from
the U.S.A to another country.)  See the file README.CR included in the
source distribution for more on this.  Otherwise, the Info-ZIP license
applies.

.TP
AES encryption notice (applies when AES encryption included):

This distribution includes cryptographic software.  The country in which
you currently reside may have restrictions on the import, possession, use,
and/or re-export to another country, of encryption software.  BEFORE using
any encryption software, please check your country's laws, regulations and
policies concerning the import, possession, or use, and re-export of
encryption software, to see if this is permitted. See
<http://www.wassenaar.org/> for more information.

The U.S. Government Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security
(BIS), has classified this software as Export Commodity Control Number
(ECCN) 5D002.C.1, which includes information security software using or
performing cryptographic functions and makes it eligible for export under
the License Exception ENC Technology Software Unrestricted (TSU) exception.

.SH EXAMPLES
To be added.

.SH BUGS
Large files (> 2 GB) and large archives not yet supported.

Split archives not yet supported.

.SH SEE ALSO
zip(1), unzip(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Info-ZIP
