.\" =========================================================================
.\" Copyright (c) 1990-2014 Info-ZIP.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" See the accompanying file LICENSE, version 2009-Jan-2 or later
.\" (the contents of which are also included in zip.h) for terms of use.
.\" If, for some reason, all these files are missing, the Info-ZIP license
.\" also may be found at:  ftp://ftp.info-zip.org/pub/infozip/license.html
.\" ==========================================================================
.\"
.\" zipnote.1 by E. Gordon for Zip 3.0, 3.1
.\"
.TH ZIPNOTE 1 "6 November 2015 (v3.1)" Info-ZIP
.SH NAME
zipnote \- write the comments in zipfile to stdout, edit comments and rename files in zipfile (v3.1)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.I zipnote
.RB [ \-w ]
.RB [ \-b\ path ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-L ]
zipfile

.SH ARGUMENTS
.in +13
.ti -13
zipfile  Zipfile to read comments from or edit.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-w
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-write
Write comments to a zipfile from stdin (see below).

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-b\ \fRpath
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-temp-dir\ \fRpath
Use path for the temporary zip file.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-L
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-license
Show software license.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-q
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-quiet
Quieter operation, suppress some informational messages.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-v
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-version
Show version information.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-h
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-help\ \ \ \ 
Show a short help.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-hh
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-more-help
Show more help.


.SH DESCRIPTION
.I zipnote
writes the comments in a zipfile to stdout.  This is the default mode.  A second mode
allows updating the comments in a zipfile as well as allows changing the names
of the files in the zipfile.  These modes are described below.

.SH EXAMPLES
To write all comments in a zipfile to stdout use for example
.LP
.nf
     zipnote foo.zip > foo.tmp
.fi
.LP
This writes all comments in the zipfile
.I foo.zip
to the file
.I foo.tmp
in a specific format.

.LP
If desired, this file can then be edited to change the comments and then used
to update the zipfile.
.LP
.nf
     zipnote -w foo.zip < foo.tmp
.fi
.LP
The names of the files in the zipfile can also be changed in this way.  This is done by
following lines like
.nf
     "@ name"
.fi
in the created temporary file (called
.I foo.tmp
here) with lines like
.nf
     "@=newname"
.fi
and then using the -w option as above.

.SH BUGS
The temporary file format is rather specific and zipnote is rather picky about it.
It should be easier to change file names in a script.

Does not yet support writing large (> 2 GB) or split archives.

UTF-8 paths are not yet fully supported.

.SH SEE ALSO
zip(1), unzip(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Info-ZIP
