.\" =========================================================================
.\" Copyright (c) 1990-2014 Info-ZIP.  All rights reserved.
.\"
.\" See the accompanying file LICENSE, version 2009-Jan-2 or later
.\" (the contents of which are also included in zip.h) for terms of use.
.\" If, for some reason, all these files are missing, the Info-ZIP license
.\" also may be found at:  ftp://ftp.info-zip.org/pub/infozip/license.html
.\" ==========================================================================
.\"
.\" zipsplit.1 by E. Gordon for Zip 3.0, 3.1
.\"
.TH ZIPSPLIT 1 "6 November 2015 (v3.1)" Info-ZIP
.SH NAME
zipsplit \- split a zipfile into smaller zipfiles (v3.1)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.I zipsplit
.RB [ \-t ]
.RB [ \-i ]
.RB [ \-p ]
.RB [ \-s ]
.RB [ \-n\ size ]
.RB [ \-r\ room ]
.RB [ \-b\ path ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-L ]
zipfile

.SH ARGUMENTS
.in +13
.ti -13
zipfile  Zipfile to split.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.PD 0
.B \-t
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-total-only
Report how many files it will take, but don't make them.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-i
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-index-file
Make index (zipsplit.idx) and count its size against first zip file.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-n\ \fRsize
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-split-size\ \fRsize
Make zip files no larger than "size" (default = 1440k).  Size can be just a
number or a number followed by a prefix.  For instance, 10k = 10 x 1024 bytes.
Can use k = 1 KiB, m = 1 MiB, or g = 1 GiB.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-r\ \fRroom
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-room\ \fRroom
Leave room for "room" bytes on the first disk (default = 0).

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-b\ \fRpath
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-outdir\ \fRpath
Use path for the output zip files.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-q
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-quiet
Quieter operation, suppress some informational messages.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-p
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-pause
Pause between output zip files.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-s
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-sequential
Do a sequential split (maintain entry order) even if it takes more zip files.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-v
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-version
Show version information.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-L
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-license
Show software license.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-h
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-help\ \ \ 
Show a short help.

.TP
.PD 0
.B \-hh
.TP
.PD
.B \-\-more-help
Show more help.

.SH DESCRIPTION
.I zipsplit
reads a zipfile and splits it into smaller zipfiles.

.SH EXAMPLES
To be filled in.

.SH BUGS
Does not yet support writing large (> 2 GB) or split archives.

.SH SEE ALSO
zip(1), unzip(1)
.SH AUTHOR
Info-ZIP
